Understanding Embeddings in Machine Learning (#6177)
section-engineering-education/engineering-education: content/articles/understanding-embeddings-in-machine-learning/index.md

Existing approaches are not helpful and applicable as they tend to have flaws when transforming the data. A better approach would be to use [embedding](https://towardsdatascience.com/neural-network-embeddings-explained), a low dimensional representation of high dimensional data. The article will look at embeddings in detail and solve real-world problems involving complex data.

### The concept of embedding in data transformation
The concept of embeddings is highly dependent on machine learning models. To grasp the concept better, we must first know the requirements of the machine learning models. One of the most common features of machine learning algorithms is that they only accept low-dimensional data as their inputs. Each input feature in a neural network is a number meaning that non-numeric variables must be converted into numbers and vectors.  

> For instance, variables such as users and items in [recommender systems](https://www.analyticssteps.com/blogs/what-are-recommendation-systems-machine-learning) are non-numeric. However, we can use the product ID to represent the items. However, to achieve this, we have to treat the ID as the continuous numeric variables the way it is done in neural networks. It would imply that the higher numbers are more significant than the lower numbers. The same happens with similar numbers, assuming the same numbers represent the same items. The analogy makes sense for variables like age. However impossible to represent [categorical variables](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/categorical-variable). Before using embeddings, one of the commonly used methods to represent categorical variables was called [one-hot encoding](https://machinelearningmastery.com/how-to-one-hot-encode-sequence-data-in-python/), as discussed in the following section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, variables such as users and items in [recommender systems](https://www.analyticssteps.com/blogs/what-are-recommendation-systems-machine-learning) are non-numeric. We can use the product ID to represent the items. However, to achieve this, we have to treat the ID as the continuous numeric variables the way it is done in neural networks. It would imply that the higher numbers are more significant than the lower numbers. 
The same happens with similar numbers, assuming the same numbers represent the same items. The analogy makes sense for variables like age. However impossible to represent [categorical variables](https://www.sciencedirect.com/topics/mathematics/categorical-variable). Before using embeddings, one of the commonly used methods to represent categorical variables was [one-hot encoding](https://machinelearningmastery.com/how-to-one-hot-encode-sequence-data-in-python/), as discussed in the following section.
```

### Understanding One-Hot encoding
It refers to an unsupervised technique that represents categorical variables by mapping them to a vector to generate a binary. The process was easy as it would need one to create a vector of the same size as the number of categories while all the values have been set to 0. Then the rows could be set to 1. 

Since the technique transforms categorical variables into continuous variables, many zeros and ones will be produced. Due to this, an issue of the unmanageable number of dimensions arises, especially where the variables have a variety of unique characters. The main reason is that each item in the vector space is equally distanced and impossible to compare. In addition, there is no way to compare the categories with differences in variance when it comes to vector space. This, in turn, means it is not possible to determine whether the entities are related to each other. Extensive manual labeling that is not logical has to be done to generate one-to-one mappings and grouping, looking for similarities.

> In order to solve the above issue, the categorical variables must be represented well and keep the relationship information between the items. Also, categorical variables have to be minimized to keep the items of the same categories packed together. The following section explains that this can be achieved by using embeddings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To solve the issue above, the categorical variables must be represented well and keep the relationship information between the items. Also, categorical variables have to be minimized to keep the items of the same categories packed together. The following section explains how we can use embeddings to solve this encoding problem.
```

### Creating embeddings
Before building embeddings, it is essential to have a supervised ML model well defined. This means that the model must be trained to transform the categories into vectors. For instance, we can assume a model that tells the type of meal the person will take based on their previous meals preferences. We can then create a model that will take our data as the input and transform it into a vector. Then the vector will predict the meal the person will take next. This implies that similar vectors refer to the meal taken frequently. The representation can be used for customization. In our case, we have used embeddings to solve a supervised problem. However, it is better to note that creating an embedding can be an unsupervised problem.

### Commonly used models in embeddings
#### PCA

> [PCA](https://www.keboola.com/blog/pca-machine-learning) method is used to reduce the variables into small subsets to minimize the size of an entity. This method makes the variables complex to understand, which may cause data loss; however, it makes the model efficient.

Reviewer: This description of PCA is too shallow. Consider adding more information about the embedding.

#### BERT
It is a pre-trained model designed to solve Word2vec's context problems. The training of this model involves two steps. The first step involves training the model over a massive amount of data to generate embeddings. End-users perform the second training, and it involves training the model using a massive amount of data based on their contexts.

[BERT](https://towardsdatascience.com/bert-explained-state-of-the-art-language-model-for-nlp-f8b21a9b6270) pays attention to the word context before even creating an embedding. Like in the previous example, the word `sing` will have different embeddings. Therefore this technique is a preferred model for generating text embeddings.

### Examples of embeddings in the modern applications
The applications of embeddings were first started and tested in the laboratories. However, they have started being adopted in different production systems with more advancement and improvements. Some of these fields include:

#### Recommender systems

> This system suggests different products to the users based on their ratings and preferences. In order to implement embeddings in these kinds of systems, two approaches are followed: the [content-based approach](https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-recommender-systems-1-971bd274f421) and the [collaborative filtering](https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/recommendation/collaborative/basics) approach. In collaborative filtering, the system is trained by actions to give the preferred recommendations. These systems make use of embeddings to give out recommendations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This system suggests different products to the users based on their ratings and preferences. To implement embeddings in these kinds of systems, two approaches are followed: the [content-based approach](https://towardsdatascience.com/introduction-to-recommender-systems-1-971bd274f421) and the [collaborative filtering](https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/recommendation/collaborative/basics) approach. In collaborative filtering, the system is trained by actions to give the preferred recommendations. These systems make use of embeddings to give out recommendations.
```

In the SVD example we earlier highlighted, we noticed that if we multiply both item and user embeddings, we end up with a rating prediction. This shows that products and their users are closely related, and thus we can conclude that the same items will get the same ratings from the same users.

> #### Sematic search

Reviewer: You've misspelt the word "Semantic"
